NOTES

multiplyqualitative

Created by Mark Eli Kalderon on 2008-05-05

# Introduction

Notes to be taken account of in rewriting "The Multiply Qualitative"

# NOUS review

Reviewer: 1
Comments to the Author
Report on 'The Multiply Qualitative' 
This is a professional paper on an important issue that argues a reasonably plausible case (though I have reservations I shall mention below). I'm sorry to say, though, that in general I found the paper relatively light on important new material: it gives a good exposition of Shoemaker's 2003 & 2006 worries, and of some views that are elsewhere argued more fully by Kalderon and others, but the main new arguments of the paper really only get going in the middle of ยง 6 -- and I'm sorry to say I didn't feel the strength of argument and depth of investigation in what followed were really sufficient for publication in a top journal.

The paper argues, in general, that the claims (1) 'that the qualitative character of color experience is inherited from the qualitative character of the experienced color' and (2) 'that there are faultless forms of variation in color perception' are in fact (despite Shoemaker's worries) compatible. The key to the solution (in Sect. 7) is supposed to lie in substituting an improved conception of experience for the old conception of it as a 'conscious modification of a subject'.


Main questions

The main proposal of the paper builds on rejecting the conception of an experience of a color as a 'conscious modification of a subject', and conceiving of it instead as a matter of the perceiver's coming to 'stand in a relation to that color's instantiation' (17-18). If one and the same color c produces experiences with different qualitative content in (say) Norm and Norma, then (given this improved conception of experience) we can say that the 'proximate effects on Norm and Norma themselves differ'--which means that 'distinct causal features of the color are involved in Norm and Norma's perception' and, in turn, that 'a qualitative aspect of the color must be an intrinsic causal power.' (p. 18)
    The idea, I think, is that we may say that one color c produces two different experiences e1 and e2 (in Norm and Norma); but this is not a proof (as Shoemaker thinks) that c fails to determine the qualitative character of e1 and e2, but instead a sign that it is different intrinsic powers of c that are at work in the two cases. The 'proximate effect' of the color on the perceiver is the experience, not the retinal stimulation--so it is simply not true that c produces the same 'proximate effect' on the two perceivers: it produces different ones.
       I think this is an interesting suggestion, but it does invite a much fuller investigation. What if an objector were to say, 'OK, c produces different experiences e1 and e2 (we all agree this anyway: given either the new conception of experience or the old one). But what gives you the right to say that it is distinct intrinsic causal features of the color that are at work in the two cases? Isn't there a clear sense in which we want to say (indeed, did say, in setting up the example) that the experiences are different in Norm and in Norma because their visual systems are different? You want to say that their experiences differ because they are being presented with 'different aspects' of the same color--as if that meant there was no need also to mention the difference in the visual systems (something extrinsic to the color) in giving an explanation of the resulting difference between e1 and e2.  But what determines which aspects of a color are perceived? Answer (for the kinds of case we're considering): surely the nature of the visual system of the perceivers ... So I don't see that you can effectively argue that the proper explanation of the variation in experience is simply a variation intrinsic to the color.' (This is an extension of the kind of concern in Shoemaker's earlier objection about the 'Pickwickean sense' in an earlier round of argument. It is not meant as a knock-down objection--but I do wish the discussion had been taken further.)  --I'd love to see some more discussion of what an 'intrinsic property' in this context is (is it something that one thing could have if it were the one thing in existence, or what?). --And, above all, I wondered where this really leaves the notion of 'qualitative character'. I can imagine a person saying, 'OK, the experiences (in your new sense) of Norm and Norma differ thanks to the different aspects of the color being perceived; similarly the (individualistically conceived) qualitative character of their perceptions also differ. Now (i) The qualitative character therefore is "inherited" from or determined by not the color, but the "aspect of color" perceived (or by the 'intrinsic causal power' underlying the presentation of that aspect). So surely this is not a defense of Campbell's view in the way he intended it. (And actually it really doesn't look like a way of allowing (1) to be true either.) (And it would certainly be good to have some more investigation of what "inheritance" comes to and what motivates inheritance claims in this domain.) More importantly, (ii) couldn't a person who liked individualistically conceived qualitative character actually translate the core of your proposal into her own language, and say that different aspects of the color (or different 'intrinsic causal powers') cause the different experiences in Norm and Norma? So does your new conception of experience really do a lot of work here?' (I can see the beginnings of a response on this; but in any case, it would be good to have some explicit discussion.)


Smaller Points
p. 1 '... there is a way it is like for Norm to undergo that experience.' --Does that really make sense? Or should it be rephrased as, e.g., 'there is something it is like ... '?

There are lots of cases where a plural verb has singular subject (or vice versa):
e.g. 'reflection on the problems ... reveal ...' (p. 2), 'a difference in the phenomenal properties ... suffice ...' (p. 3), etc. etc.

p. 7 contrasts the case where properties f and g have extensions that 'overlap' with the case where they 'necessarily coincide'. -- (i) I suspect that the distinction intended is simply that between cases of contingent coextensiveness and cases of necessary coextensiveness. But then the use of the phrases 'overlap' and 'necessarily coincide' is confusing -- because it seems to leave open the possibility also of cases of 'contingent coincidence' -- which I think (in the author's intended usage) is actually not meant to be coherent at all. (He wants 'necessary coincidence' to be trivially equivalent to 'coincidence'.)  (ii) I suspect 'overlap' is not at all a good term for a case of coextensiveness at all. At least in some normal usages, we say the tablecloth 'overlaps' the table when it is larger than the table: there is some 'overlap' (some extra portion that extends beyond the table). So such a term is not ideal for expressing exactly the opposite -- the case precisely of no overlap. Meanwhile, (3) the phrase 'coincides with' is of course often used, in ordinary and philosophical language, for cases of a coincidence -- in the sense, an accidental conjunction of phenomena -- which is precisely the opposite of what the author wants.
   Of course I know that usage varies, but ... (if (3) was not thought too pressing a problem) why not just talk of the extensions either 'contingently coinciding' or 'necessarily coinciding'?  And even better, why not talk, more simply, of contingent and necessary coextensiveness?

p. 8 different for SHOULD READ different from

p. 14 realtivism SHOULD READ relativism
and important range SHOULD READ an important range
p. 18 'To suppose otherwise would be a kind of level confusion.' I'm puzzled: The sentence seems (if I've not completely missed the drift of the argument) to say exactly the opposite of what was intended.

The argument at the end of ยง6 strikes me as pretty weak. Shoemaker envisages a case where two people faced with one color undergo the same 'proximate effects' (e.g. in the retina) but this 'input' is 'processed in different ways' further along in their two visual systems (thus supposedly refuting the idea that the characteristics of the experiences can be 'inherited' from the color itself). In the response at this stage, the author replies that 'in many such cases' there will actually be 'different patterns of retinal stimulation'. I am puzzled: this sounds like simply contradicting the case description envisaged by Shoemaker--for a case of 'different patterns' of retinal stimulation surely won't be a case of same 'proximate effects' of the kind Shoemaker is envisaging. (Or does the author have in mind a sameness of 'proximate effects' even earlier or 'further back' than the retina?--if so, he could give a fuller explanation.) Or perhaps the author is just substituting a different kind of case, since he doesn't believe Shoemaker's case is really possible. But he doesn't in fact defend that view; and the author himself seems to withdraw the objection on the next page. ('The worry ... is too weak ...') So I was puzzled about what exactly was being argued.

# Mind and Language Review

Page 1, para. 1. The choice to anchor color in the properties of
surfaces ("red tomato") is problematic. What experimental subjects
report about the perceived color of a surface depends not only on the
spectral reflecting properties of the surface but also on the
spectrum of the illuminant and the spectral reflectance and spatial
disposition of other surfaces in the field of view. Moreover, what
they report depends critically on what color properties they are
asked to consider (Foster, 2003).

Page 7, para. 2. That the families of properties are distinct may not
be correct. More plausibly, by analogy with the visual behavior of
dichromats and trichromats, the vision of one may be a subset of the
other: a dichromat accepts all the color matches made by a trichromat
(Wyszecki & Stiles, 1982).

Page 10, para. 3. Deuteranomaly does not produce "a reduction in
sensitivity to [the] green portion of the spectrum", at least not a
diagnostically useful one. The spectral sensitivity of deuteranopes
is almost normal (Wright, 1946).

Page 10, para. 3. The Ishihara test is not the most appropriate here.
The standard is the Rayleigh anomaloscope. Either use this or simply
refer to a color-vision test.

Page 10, para. 3. The statement "In certain circumstances of
perception, Norm is prone to take a green thing to be red" is an
exaggeration. Deuteranomalous trichromats and normal trichromats
differ in their matches of a monochromatic yellow light against a
mixture of monochromatic red and green lights, with deuteranomalous
trichromats requiring more green light, but this does not imply that
they take a green thing to be red.

Page 10, para. -1. The statement "It is plausible, then, that Norm
sees the same determinate shade of green as Norma. It is just that
their visual systems apply different color categories to this shade"
is unlikely to be true, in that there is no experimental evidence
that these two groups of observers actually differ in their naming
behavior with printed colors (Cole, Lian, Sharpe & Lakkis, 2006) or
differ in their ability to match surface colors in natural scenes
(Baraas, Foster, Amano & Nascimento, 2006).

Page 11, para. -2, lines 1-2. The use here in an apparently objective
sense of "identical color" is, as elsewhere, ambiguous. Is "color"
meant to stand for surface color (a physical correlate of spectral
reflectance), or for the spectrum of the reflected light (contingent
on the illuminant spectrum), or for some pattern of photoreceptor
activity in the eye?

Page 15, para. 1. The statement "Not only will a difference in the
peak sensitivities of the cones result in variation in color vision,
but so will varying the shape of the sensitivity curves", while being
true as a piece of argument, has an implausible premise:
spectral-sensitivity curves have a constant shape on a frequency
scale (MacNichol, 1986).

Page 15, para. 1. The statement "And the intersubjective variation in
the spectral location of the unique hues is similarly due to a
difference in the retinal effect of the visual stimulus" is almost
certainly untrue (Webster, Miyahara, Malkoc & Raker, 2000).

References

Baraas, R.C., Foster, D.H., Amano, K., & Nascimento, S.M.C. (2006).
Anomalous trichromats' judgments of surface color in natural scenes
under different daylights. Visual Neuroscience, 23 (pp. 629-635).

Cole, B.L., Lian, K.-Y., Sharpe, K., & Lakkis, C. (2006). Categorical
color naming of surface color codes by people with abnormal color
vision. Optometry and Vision Science, 83 (12), 879-886.

Foster, D.H. (2003). Does colour constancy exist? Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 7 (10), 439-443.

MacNichol, E.F. (1986). A Unifying Presentation of Photopigment
Spectra. Vision Research, 26 (9), 1543-1556.

Webster, M.A., Miyahara, E., Malkoc, G., & Raker, V.E. (2000).
Variations in normal color vision. II. Unique hues. Journal of the
Optical Society of America a-Optics Image Science and Vision, 17 (9),
1545-1555.

Wright, W.D. (1946). Researches on Normal and Defective Colour
Vision.  (London: Henry Kimpton).

Wyszecki, G., & Stiles, W.S. (1982). Color Science: Concepts and
Methods, Quantitative Data and Formulae.  (New York: John Wiley & Sons).
